[DOCS-7210] Datadog administrator's guide (#24988)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/service_owners_guide/plan.md

---
title: Plan your Datadog implementation
description: Setup and implement Datadog as a Service owner to avoid pit-falls down the road
further_reading:
- link: "/getting_started/tagging/unified_service_tagging/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Getting Started with Unified Service Tagging"
- link: "/getting_started/tracing/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Getting Started with APM Tracing"
---

## Design

### Sizing exercise

Defining a clear end goal is essential when starting a significant product implementation. However, it's impractical to know all requirements from the beginning. Product engineers iterate deployments, and systems operations manage changes to mitigate risk. Similarly, a large-scale Datadog deployment benefits from standard project management practices. Certain Datadog elements should be included in this process. Survey outlines are useful for assessing and planning your needs.

A sample survey form might look like this: 

> *Application name:*  

Reviewer: I think this is good for APM and any other intergrations we might run, however when implementing Datadog we almost always start with infrastructure and trying to get the full lay out of it. Sizing questions have lately come up when setting up agents for Database/HTTP monitoring and we do not have any such recommendations there yet.

Reviewer: To that end, this feels more like scoping than sizing

> *Application name:*  

Author: We'll change this to "Scoping exercise" vs "sizing exercise" , thanks !

	*Language:*  
		*Frameworks:*  
	*Model Layer:*   
	*View Layer:*  
	*Controller layer:*  
	*Infra Type:*  
	*Operating systems:*

**Recommendation:**   
Start whiteboarding early, collecting or consolidating a mental survey of your outline. Create a comprehensive view of your ecosystems, application language, data storage, networking, and infrastructure.

## General best practices 

> Datadog has specialized tool-tips designed for every kind of material.  After completing the sizing exercise, you will understand the types of technologies you're working with, and can start mapping those to core products in Datadog.

Reviewer: I think the sizing exercises should be geared towards 3 pillars with sections for infra/metrics, logs and APM

> Datadog has specialized tool-tips designed for every kind of material.  After completing the sizing exercise, you will understand the types of technologies you're working with, and can start mapping those to core products in Datadog.

Author: Discussed with Andrew .. For now we will leave it high level, and we can add more info for the next phase of additions to this document. Thanks for the feedback!

> ### Resource tagging 

Author: Thanks, I've added some verbiage here.

> Datadog is a tool for correlating machine data across multiple dimensions of cardinality. It cross-references an individual data points regardless of type. For example, you can compare database host telemetry with web server host thread pool sizes, displaying all logs in-line. 

Reviewer: > Datadog is a tool for correlating machine data across multiple dimensions of cardinality. It cross-references an individual data points regardless of type. For example, you can compare database host telemetry with web server host thread pool sizes, displaying all logs in-line.

I might word this as "Datadog is a tool for correlating telemetry data from multiple sources based on related dimensions. Those dimensions are defined by tags. This allows, for example, comparison between database host metrics, with web server host thread pools, with logs from both hosts, all in a single view."

> Datadog is a tool for correlating machine data across multiple dimensions of cardinality. It cross-references an individual data points regardless of type. For example, you can compare database host telemetry with web server host thread pool sizes, displaying all logs in-line. 

Author: great suggestion, I'll re-word this

> Hostname, cloud regions, OS version, and IP, are just some of the machine-generated unified vocabulary. Additionally, Datadog allows you to generate custom data terms such as cost-code, AppName, environment, and version.

Author: awesome! I've added that in this section

The real power of Datadog is its ability to contain and manage this unified vocabulary. The Datadog platform also has out-of-the-box data that is included. The application of the unified vocabulary concept, its management system, and Datadog's out-of-the-box options are combined into a concept called [Unified Service Tagging][1]

It is important to understand that tags are essentially `key:value` pairs or simple values such as "file-server" or "database", which add dimension to application performance data and infrastructure metrics. Before you begin monitoring with Datadog, it's important to take advantage of the tagging capabilities that your platforms offer as Datadog automatically imports these tags through its integrations.

For example, the [getting started with tagging][2] is a great place to start with this topic, but here are some additional highlights:

- A service is defined as a single application footprint, something with its own code repository.  
- Abbreviations and acronyms can be simplified, for example "Prod" != "Production".  
- Take time to define sources of truth for dynamic tags such as code version.

**Recommendation**:  

> As early as possible, understand [Datadog Unified Service Tagging][3].  Once developed, you can seamlessly map your infrastructure with your collected tags, unify your data streams to pivot between service metrics, logs and request traces, and assign owners to services to build informative alerts.

Reviewer 2: @andrewlopinto Seems important to consider. Do we have a recommendation for non-APM-focused deployments?

- Make rational choices in test location selection. Users are often from different regions around the world. Test from where your customers actually are.    
- Use Synthetics in conjunction with APM and RUM .  
- Define the use cases for Synthetics vs [HTTP Checks][25].  

## Additional resources

We've highlighted some important wins and best practices with APM, RUM, Synthetic Monitoring, Logs, and Dashboards to help you achieve success in getting started with those products and components. Some additional resources that are important when planning your implementation phase are outlined below.

### Live processes 

[Live processes][26] can be used to view all of your running processes in one place. For example, it can provide PID-level information of a running Apache process, to help you understand and troubleshoot transient issues. Additionally, you can query for processes running on a specific host, in a specific availability zone, or running a specific workload. [Configure][27] live processes on your hosts, containers, or AWS ECS Fargate instances to take advantage of this feature.

### Availability, latency, and SSL expiration 

> Web server operations depend on the network availability of ports, the validity of SSL certificates, and low latencies.  Install the [HTTP_Check][25] to monitor local or remote HTTP endpoints, detect bad response codes (such as 404), and identify soon-to-expire SSL certificates.

Author: Good callout, I'll add!

{{< img src="/service_owners_guide/fleet_automation.png" alt="Fleet Management home screen" style="width:90%;">}}

### Remote Configuration

Use Datadog's [Remote Configuration][35] (enabled by default), to remotely configure and change the behavior of Datadog components (for example, Agents, tracing libraries, and Observability Pipelines Worker) deployed in your infrastructure. See [supported products and capabilities][36] for more information.

### Notebooks 

Use Datadog [Notebooks][37] to share with team members to aid in troubleshooting investigations or incidents.

## Optimizing data collection 

Datadog can collect and observe many things in your environments, however, it is important to limit the amount of collection points and establish guard rails. In this section we will discuss the mechanisms that control the telemetry collection, and discuss how these can be codified into local standards.

> ### Infrastructure

Author: Hey @dogeahill are you suggesting we should move the Optimizing data collection section up higher, possibly in general best practices with resource tagging?

> ### Infrastructure

Reviewer: Sorry, I meant the Infrastructure section should be up higher

> ### Infrastructure

Author: Ah I see, I will defer to @andrewlopinto on this one as well as this Infra section is specifically covering how to limit data collection (hence Optimizing data collection section), but maybe the whole section should be moved up some.

> ### Infrastructure

Author: I went ahead and moved this section up under Product best practices as it does seem to flow better there.

Datadog interacts with the monitoring API of HyperVisor managers (Hyper-V, vSphere, PCF), container schedulers (K8s, rancher, docker), and public cloud providers(AWS, Azure, GCP).  Datadog's unique ability allows the platform to [autodiscover][38] new objects (pods, VMs, EC2s, ALBs, AzureSQL, GCP blobs) that are created within those environments. There are reasons to control this collection as many of these objects have billing implications to be aware of.

The usage of Datadog within these auto-discovered environment types is critical to understand. These include linkages for excluding billable objects for [AWS][39], GCP, [Azure][40], HyperV, PCF, and vSphere.

> **Recommendations:**    

Author: We don't have a specific section on Autodiscovery per say, We should link somewhere here more to how Autodiscovery works so this is more clear.

> **Recommendations:**    

Author: Added more info here.

---
title: Plan your Datadog implementation

> description: Setup and implement Datadog as a Service owner to avoid pit-falls down the road

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Setup and implement Datadog as a Service owner to avoid pitfalls down the road
```

further_reading:
- link: "/getting_started/tagging/unified_service_tagging/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Getting Started with Unified Service Tagging"
- link: "/getting_started/tracing/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Getting Started with APM Tracing"
---

## Design

### Sizing exercise

Defining a clear end goal is essential when starting a significant product implementation. However, it's impractical to know all requirements from the beginning. Product engineers iterate deployments, and systems operations manage changes to mitigate risk. Similarly, a large-scale Datadog deployment benefits from standard project management practices. Certain Datadog elements should be included in this process. Survey outlines are useful for assessing and planning your needs.

> A sample survey form might look like this: 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps move the sample survey form after the recommendation

Author: We might want to make this look more like an intake form/ diagram - more specific to a working example, possibly a graphic.
if it's not ready we can remove for this iteration.

Author: for not adjusted the formatting on this and moved it below the recommendation

For example, [Getting started with tagging][2], as well as Datadog's e-book on [Tagging Best Practices][42], is a great place to start with this topic, but here are some additional highlights:

- A service is defined as a single application footprint, something with its own code repository.  
- Abbreviations and acronyms can be simplified, for example "Prod" != "Production".  
- Take time to define sources of truth for dynamic tags such as code version.

**Recommendation**:  
As early as possible, understand [Datadog Unified Service Tagging][3].  Once developed, you can seamlessly map your infrastructure with your collected tags, unify your data streams to pivot between service metrics, logs and request traces, and assign owners to services to build informative alerts.

{{< img src="/service_owners_guide/unified_service_tagging-3.png" alt="Diagram of Unified Service tagging with the 3 reserved tags: Service, Env, Version" style="width:90%;">}}

### RBAC

> At the architectural design level, there are two main areas of access control within Datadog that need to be considered; organizational structure, and internal account [Role-Based Access Control][4].  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the architectural design level, there are two main areas of access control within Datadog that need to be considered: organizational structure, and internal account [Role-Based Access Control][4].  
```

#### Multi-Organizational Structure
Larger users often have more than one Datadog account instance. In some cases, full isolation within a single company is necessary. To accommodate this topology, [multiple organizational accounts][5] can be managed together for commercial purposes while remaining completely separate technologically. It is recommended to manage child organizations from a single parent organization account. 

#### Internal Account RBAC
Datadog has a granular system of Role-Based Access Control that can connect to your existing SAML authentication service. SAML group-mappings can be built against the Datadog default roles and team objects. Datadog provides three default roles, however these might not be enough to model complexity of your local AD/LDAP Roles. [Service accounts][6] are available for non-interactive purposes like [API and App Key][7] ownership, separating user activity from system tasks. There are granular permissions that can model the access and protections you need.  

> As an additional layer, Datadog offers [Teams][8]. Teams offer an added layer of user grouping designed to be flexible, informal, and ad-hoc. Users can self-join, or be unilaterally added.  Teams are highly integrated into sub-tools of Datadog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an additional layer, Datadog offers [Teams][8]. Teams offer an added layer of user grouping designed to be flexible, informal, and ad-hoc. Users can self-join or be unilaterally added. Teams are highly integrated into sub-tools of Datadog.
```

These base functions make it easy to ingest and monitor logs for some of the following use-cases:

Log format normalization  
: Centralized control of date/time, value replacement, and referenced lookup.

Global Sensitive Data PII Management  
: PII and SDS are scrubbed first.

Routing and forwarding 
: One centralized UI to send logs to index, archive, or forwarding destination.  

Cost-effective value capture 
: Malleable log field definition, and high volume/low value distillation.  

Global log archive 
: Catch-all log archiver.  

Global SIEM 
: All logs are tested for security at ingestion as a pre-processor

**Recommendations:**   
- Understand [Logging without Limits][14]™ (identify most logged service status, high volume logging patterns, log pattern exclusion filters).  
- Develop a log ingestion plan and review [best practices][20] for log management.  
- Configure [log archives][16].

### Real User Monitoring

> Real User Monitoring and Session Replay can give highly granular insights into what an end-user is experiencing. When considering to install RUM, consider installations on high value sessions where the data can be used to make meaningful changes in your environment.  Similarly, the power of Session Replay is tremendous; it serves as "the picture that tells a thousand words" when it comes to troubleshooting issues observed by humans. The highest value of Real User Monitoring and Session Replay comes from tracking actual customer experience, and is most likely of limited value in non-productions scenarios.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Real User Monitoring and Session Replay can give highly granular insights into what an end-user is experiencing. When considering whether to install RUM, consider installations on high value sessions where the data can be used to make meaningful changes in your environment.  Similarly, Session Replay can serve as "the picture that tells a thousand words" when it comes to troubleshooting issues observed by humans. The highest value of Real User Monitoring and Session Replay comes from tracking actual customer experience, and is most likely of limited value in non-productions scenarios.  
```

**Recommendations:** 

- [Discard front-end errors][21]  
- Configure your [RUM sampling rate][22]  
- Limit RUM and Session Replay deployments to production and near-production environments.

### Synthetic monitoring

Datadog has a full synthetic application suite, including testing for browser, mobile, and API testing. Datadog synthetic tests can be linked back to the application behavior it generated, and from there, into the database, message queue, and all other downstream services.  

**Recommendations:**

- Review [Synthetics Consumption Considerations][23]  
- Reduce test maintenance by using [sub-tests][24].
- Make rational choices in test location selection. Users are often from different regions around the world. Test from where your customers actually are.    

> - Use Synthetics in conjunction with APM and RUM .  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use Synthetics in conjunction with APM and RUM. 
```

- Define the use cases for Synthetics vs [HTTP Checks][25].  

## Optimizing data collection 

> Datadog can collect and observe many things in your environments, however, it is important to limit the amount of collection points and establish guard rails. In this section we will discuss the mechanisms that control the telemetry collection, and discuss how these can be codified into local standards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datadog can collect and observe many things in your environments. However, it is important to limit the amount of collection points and establish guard rails. In this section we will discuss the mechanisms that control the telemetry collection, and discuss how these can be codified into local standards.
```

### Availability, latency, and SSL expiration 

Web server operations depend on the network availability of ports, the validity of SSL certificates, and low latencies.  Install the [HTTP_Check][25] to monitor local or remote HTTP endpoints, detect bad response codes (such as 404), and identify soon-to-expire SSL certificates. Additionally the [ping][43] check can be utilized to test the reachability of a host and measures the round-trip time for messages sent from the check to the destination host.

### Network Monitoring

Web servers are almost always inter-connected with other services through a network fabric that is vulnerable to drops and can result in re-transmits.  Use Datadog's [network integration][28] and enable [Network Performance Monitoring][29] to gain visibility into your network traffic between services, containers, availability zones, and other tags on your infrastructure.

## Ancillary products

> Datadog is a platform of tremendous value. From years of collective experience with customers, we have developed numerous ancillary products that complement our flagship offerings.  Included in the price of Infrastructure monitoring is a robust list of ancillary products that can enhance your Datadog observability platform. Datadog is a turn-key solution, but it is important to stay focused after the initial roll-out. The following are some examples of ancillary products that can be utilized to maximize your suite of products.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From years of collective experience with customers, Datadog has developed numerous ancillary products that complement our flagship offerings.  Included in the price of Infrastructure monitoring is a robust list of ancillary products that can enhance your Datadog observability platform. Datadog is a turn-key solution, but it is important to stay focused after the initial roll-out. The following are some examples of ancillary products that can be utilized to maximize your suite of products.
```

### Service Catalog

> Services are the base object of observability. Utilizing the [service catalog][30] allows you to see at glance which services were deployed most recently, or have not been deployed for a long time. Additionally this view shows which services are reporting the most errors, and whether they have on-going incidents, and much more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Services are the base object of observability. Utilizing the [service catalog][30] allows you to see at glance which services were deployed most recently, or have not been deployed for a long time. Additionally, this view shows which services are reporting the most errors, and whether they have on-going incidents, and much more.
```

{{< img src="/service_owners_guide/service_catalog.png" alt="Service Catalog home screen" style="width:90%;">}}

### Event Management 

> Without any additional setup, [event management][31] can be used to see 3rd party event statuses, events generated from the Agent and installed integrations, and more. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without any additional setup, [event management][31] can be used to see third-party event statuses, events generated from the Agent and installed integrations, and more. 
```

### Software Development Lifecycle

To begin mapping out your deployment patterns, use the technology survey, combine it with the [Datadog 101][7] training, and begin to develop a plan of action. Below is an example intended to be modified to suit your individual needs. It outlines the deployment pattern from the dimension of SDLC environment (dev,qa,stage,prod), but should be customized to the local standards and conditions. Begin setting expectations within your own Datadog user base what the term "Standard Datadog Deployment" actually means. 

|  | Dev | QA | Staging | Prod |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| **APM** | Deny/Allow | Allow | Allow | Allow |
| **Synthetics** | Deny | Deny/Allow | Allow | Allow |
| **Logs** | Allow | Allow | Allow | Allow |
| **RUM** | Deny | Deny/Allow |  Allow | Allow |
| **DBM** | Deny/Allow | Deny/Allow | Allow | Allow |
| **Live Processes** | Deny | Deny/Allow | Allow | Allow |
|  |  |  |  |  |

**Recommendation** :
Not every tool is fit for every job.  Evaluate the Datadog product use cases, and specifically match them to your needs. Consider the levels of SDLC, application importance, and Datadog product purpose.

> ## Plan summary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```
